# DNA Databases in Law Enforcement

In this document, I discuss the two articles about DNA databases of criminals, and whether they are effective in law enforcement and whether they are inethical. I present two opposing perspectives on a pressing issue, especially since law enforcement was brought up during the Black Lives Matter movement last year.

## Article 1
In the Undark article [Do DNA Databases Make Would-Be Criminals Think Twice?](https://undark.org/2019/09/23/dna-database-deter-crime/), Oscar Schwartz discusses the benefits of criminal DNA databases. First, criminal DNA databases have caught cold hits. Cold hits are cases where there are no suspects or leads, so police officers use the DNA database to find a genetic match. For example, Damoine Wilcoxson was charged with two homicide cases in Indiana. Indiana did not have a criminal DNA database, Combined DNA Index System or CODIS, for non-convicted felons, but Ohio did have a one for most of its criminals and Wilcoxson was previously arrested on Ohio for robbery. If it were not for Ohio's database, the two murder cases in Indiana would have been unsolved. Consequently, Indiana expanded their database to collect criminals of all crimes. Another example is Gabriel Adrian Avila who was charged with rape after finding his DNA on the victim's body and matching it with CODIS. Furthermore, the database reduces recidivism, i.e. the tedency of someone to reoffend. Jennifer Doleac, a professor, analyzed criminal data and found that violent offenders who gave a DNA sample were 17% less likely to reoffend within the first five years of release than those who did not. Similarly, in Denmark, they were 43% less likely to reoffended in the first year of release, and they had better life outcomes. Doleac explains that criminals are less likely to reoffend because they know the likelihood of getting caught increases. Lastly, the DNA database is more cost-effective. Doleac predicts that it saves between $1,566 and $19,945 per year. Instead of increasing the punishment, i.e. longer incarceration time, increasing the likelihood of getting caught would deter criminals better and solve the mass incarceration problem too.

I think solving the mass incarceration problem would require a multifaceted approach, so only using CODIS is inadequate in addressing the urgent issue. However, I agree that increasing punishment is not an effective way at deterring criminals. I also agree that people are less likely to commit a crime if they know they are likely to get caught, so I can see how the CODIS reduces recidvism. Furthermore, it is impressive that the CODIS was able to solve those two cases with little to no leads or suspects. It is important to catch dangerous criminals, so it is fortunate that those two men were already in the CODIS. There are other forms of surveillance such as CCTV cameras, but CCTV cameras have their limitations. CCTV cameras cannot be installed everywhere. For example, most people would not want to be monitored in their homes. These cameras are also not even in every public space and there are blind spots that the cameras do not capture, unless the cameras are installed in all areas. This would be costly because they would require installment and maintenance. It would also be hard to store all the footage of all public spaces for an indefinite time period. On the other hand, it would be easier to store DNA data in a database for all criminals. Genetic data should not change drastically over time, so it is not necessary to recollect people's DNA. Thus, I understand there are benefits to the CODIS, but I do not think it is the most effective method.

## Article 2
In the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers article [DNA Databases in the U.S. and China Are Tools of Racial Oppression](https://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-talk/biomedical/ethics/dna-databases-in-china-and-the-us-are-tools-of-racial-oppression), Thor Benson counters with the drawbacks of criminal DNA databases. First, the database has a disproportionate amount of people of color. Black men are five times more likely to be arrested than white men, so they are more prevalent in the sample. Undocumented immigrants also have their DNA collected and added to the database. The CODIS is no longer a representative random collection of data, and certain minority groups are more likely to be convicted from the data. Additionally, DNA samples can be contaminated, so there could be wrongful arrests made. The New York Office of Chief Medical Examiner disclosed that it had created DNA profiles using contaminated samples. For example, there was a homicide victim whose DNA was wrongfully added to the database due to contamination. Furthermore, law enforcement can make mistakes and/or use the tool incorrectly, which leads to wrongful arrests as well. For example, the New York Office of Chief Medical Examiner disclosed that a laboratory analyst entered the wrong data into the database, which led to the arrest of a man for rape but the man was in prison during the rape. Lastly, it is possible that the DNA database can be used for more controversial ways. In China, they collect the DNA of as many Chinese men as possible, because the Chinese government states that men are more likely to commit crimes. The database was how they were able to prosecute the Uigur Muslims and lock them in concentration camps. 

I think it is true that since the CODIS has disproportionately more people of color, they are more likely to be convicted because they are in the database. Police already have inherent bias to arrest people of color, so people of color will just keep having their data uploaded to the CODIS. The CODIS will constantly have gaps in the white community, which will continue to perpetuate people of color being in the criminal system. I also think it is a good point that humans are imperfect, so there is a high possibility that there have been a number of wrongful arrests made as a result of contaminated DNA or incorrect data entry. If the law enforcement arrests someone, it is important they get it right the first time, because there are many negative effects of wrongful arrests. The person who was wrongfully arrested will have to get their name cleared. They may get stigmatized even if they cleared their name. If they are unable to correct the law enforcement's error, they would have to endure punishment for a crime they did not even commit. This can lead to physical, emotional, and psychological harm. I also agree that it is likely that the US government can follow China's footsteps and misuse this DNA database for whatever nefarious agenda. Therefore, I believe that even though the criminal DNA database has its strengths, I agree that non-representative collection, human errors, and potentiality for misuse makes criminal DNA databases unethical.